# Road vehicles—Software update engineering

ICS:43.040.15

THIS DOCUMENT IS A DRAFT CIRCULATEDFOR COMMENT AND APPROVAL.IT ISTHEREFORE SUBJECT TO CHANGE AND MAYNOT BE REFERRED TO AS AN INTERNATIONALSTANDARD UNTIL PUBLISHED AS SUCH.

IN ADDITION TO THEIR EVALUATION ASTECHNOLOGICAL, COMMERCIAL ANDUSER PURPOSES, DRAFT INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS MAY ON OCCASION HAVE TOBE CONSIDERED IN THE LIGHT OF THEIRPOTENTIAL TO BECOME STANDARDS TO WHICH REFERENCE MAY BE MADE INNATIONAL REGULATIONS.

RECIPIENTS OF THIS DRAFT ARE INVITEDTO SUBMIT, WITH THEIR COMMENTSNOTIFICATION OF ANY RELEVANT PATENTRIGHTS OF WHICH THEY ARE AWARE AND TO

# IS0/DIS 24089:2022(E)

# COPYRIGHTPROTECTEDDOCUMENT

# @ IS0 2022

All rights reserved. Unless otherwise specified, or required in the context of its implementation, no part of this publication maythe internet or an intranet, without prior written permission. Permission can be requested from either ISO at the address belowor ISO's member body in the country of the requester.

ISO copyright officeCP 401 · Ch.de Blandonnet 8CH-1214 Vernier, GenevaPhone: +41 22 749 01 11Email: copyright@iso.org Website: www.iso.orgPublished in Switzerland

16 Foreword. iv17 Introduction. ...V18 1 Scope.....19 2 Normative references. 120 3 Terms and definitions . 121 3.1 General terminology 222 3.2 Terminology for the software update operation 523 Organization level software update requirements. .524 4.1 Objectives...25 4.2 General...26 4.3 Requirements and recommendations. 627 4.4 Work products28 5 Project level software update requirements .829 5.1 0bjectives...30 5.2 General...3132 5.4 Work products .1033 6 Infrastructure design and development.. .1034 6.1 Objectives.. ..1035 6.2 General.36 6.3 Requirements and recommendations. .1137 6.4Workproducts ..1238 7 .1239 7.1 0bjectives. 1240 7.2 General...41 7.3 Requirements and recommendations.42 7.4 Work products 1543 8 Software update package development. .1644 8.1 Objectives. .1645 8.2 General. ..1646 8.3 Requirements and recommendations. .1647 8.4 Workproducts ...1848 6 Software update campaign operations .1849 9.1 0bjectives. ..1850 9.2 General.. 1851 9.3 Requirements and recommendations. .1852 9.4 Work products 2353 Bibliography .2454

# 56 Foreword

57 ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) is a worldwide federation of national standards5859 ISO technical committees.Each member body interested in a subject for which a technical committee has been60 established has the right to be represented on that committee.International organizations,governmental and61 non-governmental, in liaison with ISo, also take part in the work. ISo collaborates closely with the62 International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) on all matters of electrotechnical standardization.

The procedures used to develop this document and those intended for its further maintenance are describedin the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1. In particular, the different approval criteria needed for the different types ofISO documents should be noted. This document was drafted in accordance with the editorial rules of theISO/IEC Directives, Part 2 (see www.iso.org/directives).

67 Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the subject of patent68 rights.ISO shall not be held responsible foridentifying any or all such patent rights.Details of any patent rights69 identified during the development of the document will be in the Introduction and/or on the ISo list of patent70 declarations received (see www.iso.org/patents).

Any trade name used in this document is information given for the convenience of users and does notconstitute an endorsement.

73 For an explanation of the voluntary nature of standards, the meaning of IsO specific terms and expressions74 related to conformity assessment, as well as information about Iso's adherence to the World Trade75 Organization (WTo) principles in the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT), see www.iso.org/iso/foreword.html76 This document was prepared by Technical Committee ISO/TC 22, Road Vehicles, Subcommittee SC 32,77

78 Any feedback or questions on this document should be directed to the user's national standards body. A79 complete listing of these bodies can be found at www.iso.org/members.html.

# 08 Introduction

81 Road vehicles have been increasing their use of electronic control systems in recent years. With this has come82 increasing complexity of software in vehicles. As a result, software has become essential to the operation of83 road vehicles.This software is often updated to increase functionality and maintain the safety and8485 are important to ensure software quality, cybersecurity, and road vehicle safety.

Today, in-vehicle software is updated by skilled persons using specialized tools and equipment or by remotesoftware updates. With the increased frequency of software updates it is important to have accurate currentconfiguration information for individual vehicles to ensure software quality, cybersecurity, and road vehiclesafety.

This document assigns accountability for the processes required to update software safely and securely,provides the fundamental requirements for performing those processes correctly, and producing high qualitysoftware update packages. By applying the software update engineering requirements and recommendationsin this document, the following benefits can be expected:

Safe and secure software update operations in road vehicles;

Establishment of clear processes, including explicit goal setting, planning, auditing, process monitoring,

Establish trust that software update engineering activities are based on clear and controlled processes.

Figure 1 shows the overview of this document.

Clause 4 and clause 5 define necessary organizational rules and processes.

Clause 6 and clause 7 define the software update capabilities for infrastructure and vehicles.

Clause 8 defines creation of software update packages.

In this document, clauses are structured using following idea,

Process should be defined before actual operation

Set of Processes should be managed as assets, i.e. documented and maintained

Processes should be managed in higher level than each project, in order to reuse or refer establishedprocesses in other project.

| 1. Scope | | | |
|----------|----------------|----------------|----------------|
| 2. Normative references | | | |
| 3. Terms and definitions | | | |
| 4. Organization level software update requirements | | | |
| 5. Project level software update requirements | | | |
| 6. Infrastructure design and development | 7. Vehicle and vehicle systems design and development | 8. Software update package development | 9. Software update campaign operations |

111 Software update engineering activities occur throughout the life cycle of the vehicle.

112 It is important to apply software quality assurance, cybersecurity, and safety processes to software update113 engineering activities.

# 114Road vehicles -Software Update Engineering

116This document specifies requirements and recommendations for software update engineering in road vehicleson both the organizational and project levels

These requirements and recommendations apply to the vehicle, its systems, and/or the infrastructure.Additionally, these requirements and recommendations apply to EcUs installed in road vehicles, and the121 In addition, this document specifies requirements and recommendations for deployment of software updatepackages to road vehicles.

The development of software for vehicle functions, except for software update engineering, is outside thescope of this document

This document enables a common understanding for communicating and managing activities andresponsibilities among stakeholders.

130 This document applies to organizations involved in software update engineering in road vehicles. Such135The following documents are referred to in the text in such a way that some or all of their content constitutes136  requirements of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references,

ISO 26262-6,RoadVehicles--Functional Safety ---Part 6:Product development at the software level

ISO 26262-8,RoadVehicles--Functional Safety ---Part 8: Supporting processes

# 3.1 General terminology

3.1.1 corrective action:action to eliminate or contain a problem or failure.

3.1.2 cybersecurity:road vehicle cybersecurity condition in which assets are sufficiently protected against threat scenarios in road vehicles, vehicle systems155  and/or ECUs and infrastructure supporting software update engineering.

Note 1 to entry: In this document, for the sake of brevity, only the term cybersecurity is used.

[SOURCE: IS0/SAE 21434: modified - definition aligned to terms used in this document, addedinfrastructure, removed Note 1 to entry]

3.1.3 cybersecurity risk:effect of uncertainty on road vehicle cybersecurity expressed in terrms of attack feasibility and impact.

[SOURCE: IS0/SAE 21434]

3.1.4 electronic control unit:ECU166 embedded device in a vehicle whose software can be updated.

Note 1 to entry: Replacing an ECU can be a method of updating its software

3.1.5 functional safety risk:combination of the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm.

[SOURCE: ISO 26262-1]

3.1.6 infrastructure:services that manage software update operations, software update campaigns, documentation and/or vehicleconfiguration information, including both digital and manual activities.

Note 1 to entry: Infrastructure can include servers, tools, and/or manual activities used in the software updateoperation.

Note 2 to entry: Function(s) of the infrastructure can be implemented in the vehicle and/or externally.

3.1.7 in-vehicle resources:vehicle or ECU available properties relevant for software update engineering.
Note 1 to entry: This can include available or remaining computational power, network capacity. RAMcapacity, storage capacity and/or battery capacity

3.1.8 over the air:OTA188 method for wireless delivery of a software update package.

3.1.9 recipient:individual instance of a vehicle or component that receives a software update package during a software192 update campaign.

3.1.10 safe vehicle state:vehicle operating mode based on conditions for performing software update campaigns safely.
Note 1 to entry: Safe vehicle state can be different depending on the conditions required for the softwareupdate package.

Note 1 to entry: A skilled person can include a mechanic in a workshop.

Note 2 to entry: A skilled person can be authorized or certified for their specialised training or be a skilled enduser.

204 3.1.12205 software206

[SOURCE: NIST SP 800-53]

sequence of identifying targets; validating, distributing, downloading, installing, and activating software212213 upgrading. downgrading, and/or modifying feature-related configuration information.application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to the development and processing of softwareupdate packages

218NoTE Development of the software included in the software update package is not part of software update

[S0URCE: IEEE 610.12-1990, m0dified]

# software update method

mechanism for distribution of a software update package during a software update campaign

Note 1 to entry: The software update method can be wired (e.g. tool, USB flash drive), wireless (e.g. cellular orWi-Fi) or hardware replacement.

3.1.16software update operationsteps involved in the download, installation and activation of software update packages on a vehicle3.1.17software update packageset of software and associated metadata that is intended to be delivered to the target vehicles

Note 1 to entry: A software update package can contain updates for different ECUs.

3.1.18software update projectset of software update engineering activities for one or more targets237 3.1.19238 software update support239 capability to perform a software update campaign240 3.1.20241 tailoring242 process by which individual requirements in specifications, standards, and related documents are evaluated243244 existing or addition of new requirements

[SOURCE: ISO 27025]

246 3.1.21247 target248 class of vehicle or component defined by combination of hardware and/or software versions during software249 update campaign planning

250 3.1.22251 update252 <verb> bring up to date253 3.1.23254 vehicle configuration information255 comprehensive accounting of hardware versions, software versions, and configuration parameters in a vehicle

[SOURCE: NIST SP 800-32, modified - added 'in a vehicle' for the scope of this document.]

257 3.1.24258 vehicle state259 current vehicle operating mode260 EXAMPLE parked, stationary, driving, engine off

Note 1 to entry: Attached hardware can be a sensor, actuator, light, etc.

Note 2 to entry: For example a braking system or infotainment system.

3.1.26vehicle userperson operating, driving, owning or managing a vehicle

Note 1 to entry: Vehicle user can include skilled person.

3.2Terminologyfor thesoftwareupdate operation

3.2.1downloadstep in the software update operation when a vehicle receives a software update package3.2.2installationstep in the software update operation when the relevant parts of a software update package are installed ona recipient EcU but are not yet activated

3.2.3279 activationstep in the software update operation when the relevant parts of an installed software update package areEXAMPLE 1 A new autonomous function is installed and set to active, but might run only after the vehicle userstarts the function.

EXAMPLE 2 A software update package for a recipient ECU is installed, activated, and run immediately afteractivation without user interaction.

The objectives of this clause are to ensure that the following are performed:

a) Establishment of organization-specific rules, processes, and procedures for software update engineering;

engineering:

d) Provisioning of the necessary resource requirements, information sharing and management of

e) Performing an organizational audit for process compliance.

of this document. Governance includes compliance with required Iso standards as well as organizational305  4.3.1.1  If software update engineering applies, then changes in software in a vehicle or ECU shall be donein accordance with the requirements of this document.

EXAMPLE 1 Replace an ECU with the purpose of updating software.

EXAMPLE Process definition, technical rules, guidelines, methods and templates

- confirm compliance with the requirements of this document.

- support the execution of the corresponding activities, including the assignment of resources andresponsibilities across all those involved in the software update engineering activities;

315  NOTE These rules and processes cover vehicle system, and ECU which are affected by software updateengineering activities, and infrastructure used for software update engineering activities

4.3.1.3 In order to fulfil the requirements of this document, software update engineering shall conform

323  4.3.2.1 The organization shall establish, perform, and maintain a continuous improvement process forsoftware update engineering activities.

EXAMPLE 4 Evaluating the adequacy of current processes

3304.3.2.2The organization shall establish, maintain and perform a process to verify that after any change to

4.3.3.1  The organization shall establish, perform and maintain a policy for sharing information inside andNOTE The policy can include what information is shared, with whom the information is shared, when theinformation is shared, and how to permit sharing.

EXAMPLE Information being shared can include:

- update schedule;

- time the vehicle or its functions are unavailable during a software update campaign;

- license and intellectual property information

4.3.4.1An independent audit shall be performed on whether the organizational process for softwareupdate engineering achieves the objectives of this document.

NOTE 1 Such an audit can be included in, or combined with, an audit according to a quality managementsystem standard.

EXAMPLE In a distributed development, right to audit can be included in contract.

NOTE 2 The person that performs the audit can be internal or external to the organization.

NOTE 3 To ensure the organizational processes remain appropriate for software update engineering, an audit

NOTE IATF 16949 can be applied.

366NoTE 1 Software update engineering activities involve configuration information for software updatepackages, vehicles and infrastructure.

359 4.3.5.2 The organization shall establish, implement and maintain a requirements management system for3704.3.5.5 The organization shall establish, implement and maintain a quality management process for

EXAMPLE IATF 16949 and ISO 9001 can be used for quality management.

NOTE 2 Activities in this document can involve personal information.

3774.4.1 Organizational rules and processes resulting from the requirements of 4.3.1.1, 4.3.1.2,4.3.5.1, 4.3.5.3,

# 5.2 General

This clause covers the requirements to the organization for the software update projects including theplanning for software update projects, and managing information related to the software update projects. Inaddition, this clause includes requirements on tailoring of the software update projects and interoperability

# 5.3 Requirements and recommendations

IThe organization shall develop a plan for each software update project that covers all necessary

NOTE 1 This plan can include activities for developing and/or adapting the infrastructure, vehicle capabilities

5.3.1.2

EXAMPLE Management of functional safety risks in the context of ISO 26262.

5.3.2.2If a software update is tailored, then a rationale shall be provided as to why the tailored activitiesadequate and sufficient to achieve the applicable objectives of this document.

415 NOTE 1 An activity is tailored if it is omitted or performed in a different manner compared to its description416 in this document.

417 EXAMPLE Activities that are not performed because they are performed by another entity in the supply chain418a are not considered as tailored, but as distributed cybersecurity activities (see IS0/SAE 21434 for a definition421  NoTE 3 A bodywork equipment builder can tailor a software update project to conform with functional

424  5.3.3.1 The organization shall establish, implement and maintain a process to confirm the425 interoperability of the functions and capabilities developed under the requirements from Clause 6 and

NOTE Since the infrastructure and the vehicle system can be implemented separately, it is important to

5.3.3.2 The organization shall establish, implement, and maintain processes to preserve the integrity of434  - from organizations to vehicles;

- within the vehicle and between ECUs.

436NOTE 1 The organization transmitting software to vehicles could be OEMs, suppliers or other contracted

# 5.4 Work products

5.4.1 Software update project plan resulting from the requirements of 5.3.1.1 and 5.3.1.3

5.4.3Rationale, resulting from the requirement of 5.3.2.2.

4435.4.4 Documentation of confirmation of interoperability resulting from the requirements of 5.3.3.1 and

# 4466Infrastructure designand development

The objectives of this clause are to ensure that the following functionality is in the infrastructure:a) Managing cybersecurity risks in the infrastructure;b) Collecting and managing vehicle configuration information in the infrastructure;c) Collecting and distributing information about software update campaigns in the infrastructure;d) Creating, managing, and distributing software update packages in the infrastructure;453e) Managing failures during software update campaigns in the infrastructure.

455 This clause includes the requirements for the development of infrastructure that is used for software update457 update campaigns, such as distribution, communication, cybersecurity and information storage.Software458 update functions described in this clause support the software update campaigns on the infrastructure. Suchfunctions can be on or off vehicle depending on the architectural decisions of the organization.

6.3.2.2The infrastructure shall have one or more functions to distribute vehicle configurationinformation to related parties.

NOTE 1 Related parties could be regulatory entities or suppliers.

476 6.3.3.1The infrastructure shall have one or more functions to provide notifications as required by this

6.3.2.3The infrastructure shall have one or more functions to support the identification of dependenciesof a software update package on other systems.

# 6.3.3 Communicating software update campaign information

479NoTE 2 See requirements concerning notification in Clause 9.

4806.3.3.2The infrastructure shall have one or more functions for receiving, storing, processing, and

6.3.4.1 1The infrastructure shall have one or more functions for creating, processing, receiving, storing,

The infrastructure shall have one or more functions to correlate software update packages to

6.3.4.3The infrastructure shall have one or more functions to identify recipients based upon targets of asoftware update campaign.

6.3.4.4 The infrastructure should have one or more functions to determine whether there are sufficient

6.3.5.1The infrastructure should have one or more functions to initiate actions when the infrastructure6.4.5 Documentation of functions for performing actions in the event of software update operation failureresulting from 6.3.5.1.

507 a) Managing safety and cybersecurity risks for the vehicle and/or its ECUs;508 b) Managing vehicle configuration information in the vehicle and/or its ECUs;509  c)Managing information about the software update campaigns in the vehicle and/or its ECUs;This clause contains the requirements for the functions needed for vehicles and EcUs to support softwareupdate campaigns. These functions include communications, generating necessary vehicle information andenabling the download, installation and activation of software in vehicles.

Software update functions described in this clause support the software update operation in the vehicle. Such

NOTE 1 Management includes identification, analysis, evaluation and treatment of risks.

NOTE 2 IS0 26262 provides guidance on achieving functional safety through appropriate requirements andprocesses.

EXAMPLE 2 The interfaces between the vehicle and the bodywork equipment are defined in such a way that

7.3.1.2 Safety risks due to reasonable and foreseeable misuse of the software update operation in the

EXAMPLE 1 An OEM performs a functional safety risk assessment of a braking system and decides based onthat assessment whether a skilled person is necessary to apply the update or not.

EXAMPLE 1  ISO/PAS 21448 provides guidance on achieving safety of the intended functionality through

NOTE Management includes identification, analysis, evaluation and treatment of risks.

EXAMPLE 2 A measure is put in place to prevent unintentional installation and/or activation of software byNOTE 2 Cybersecurity risks include the risk that vehicle configuration information might be modifiedwithout authorization.

# 7.3.2Managing vehicle configuration information

0 7.3.2.1There shall be one or more functions to collect vehicle configuration information

NOTE These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.

There shall be one or more functions to identify the ECUs to which a software update package

548 NoTE 1  These functions support notification requirements in Clause 9.

1 There shall be one or more functions to provide information to related parties as required by this

NOTE 2 These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.

NOTE 1 Confirmation can be obtained for each single instance of software update campaign or a general

software update operation.

NOTE 2These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.

EXAMPLEA vehicle user confirmation could be obtained via:

- an in-vehicle display;- a mobile application;

7.3.4.1There shall be one or more functions to determine that all pre-conditions, including in-vehicle

567EXAMPLE 2 Check if the existing software version of an ECU is compatible with the software update

EXAMPLE 1 Available battery capacity and remaining charge are sufficient to perform the software update5727.3.4.3There shall be one or more functions to verify the integrity and authenticity of the downloaded

1 NoTE These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.

577 7.3.4.4 There shall be one or more functions to ensure a safe vehicle state at the start of and during the580 NOTE 2  Disabling or restricting features and functions can allow the software update operation to proceed

EXAMPLE 1 Safe vehicle state can be ensured by a skilled person in a workshop

EXAMPLE 2 The software update operation can be paused or aborted, because a safe vehicle state cannotbe maintained.

NOTE 1 These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.

EXAMPLESafety measures can include:

579  NOTE 1  Safety impacts of the software update package are identified under Clause 8.582   NOTE 3  These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.6 7.3.5Managing failure during software update campaignsNoTE 3These functions can be developed as a result of the implementation of 7.3.1.- launching fall-back operations.599  EXAMPLE 1  Requests can be received simultaneously from a wired tool and a wireless tool.602 7.4.1 Documentation of risk management resulting from 7.3.1.1 to 7.3.1.3.6037.4.2Documentation of functions for vehicle configuration information resulting from 7.3.2.1 and 7.3.2.2.

- changing the vehicle operating mode to one in which the vehicle is safe

5  7.3.5.2There shall be one or more functions to arbitrate simultaneous access requests to maintain

NOTE 1 These functions can be implemented in the vehicle and/or in the infrastructure.

598NoTE 2 Arbitration can be limitation, acceptance, or rejection of simultaneous access requests

6047.4.3 Documentation of functions for communications related to software update campaigns resulting

6067.4.4Documentation of functions for software update operations resulting from 7.3.4.1 to 7.3.4.4.

6077.4.5 Documentation of functions for managing failures of software update operations resulting from

The objectives of this clause are to ensure that the following are performed:

b)Assembling the software update package containing the necessary software component(s) and metadatafor the target(s);

# 8.2General

This clause includes requirements for assembling the software update package and verifying and validatingthe software update package's contents, as well as identifying the types of vehicles or systems to receive thesoftware update package. Software update package development is the process of putting all necessaryelements into a form for the software update operation at the vehicle level. The software update package is627 NOTE In the case of suppliers, the target may be ECUs. In the case of OEMs, the target may be the vehicles or

8.3.1.1The organisation shall determine the list of the target(s) for each software update package

NOTE 1 In the case of suppliers, the software and associated metadata may be for a single EcU. For OEMs, thesoftware and associated metadata may cover the vehicle or multiple ECUs.

NOTE 2 Software Update of engine systems may require different conditions if performed in the workshop orby the vehicle user.

EXAMPLE 1 Metadata can include:

- safe vehicle state;

- conditions;

- compatibility information;

1 - necessary in-vehicle resources.

644 8.3.1.3  Compatibility of the software update package with the existing software and hardware of the

EXAMPLE In-vehicle resources can be necessary to complete the software update operation or run the new

8.3.2.1Only the intended software and metadata shall be assembled into the software update package.

EXAMPLE Ensuring that only software authorized for release is included in the package.

8.3.2.2A software update package shall be created, which contains the necessary software and metadata.

determined.

NOTE This can include actions performed by the organisation, a skilled person or the vehicle

8.3.3.1 The required verification and validation needed for a software update package shall be

target shall be validated.

NOTE See 9.3.3.10 for validation for the recipient.

8.3.3.4Necessary in-vehicle resources in the target shall be validated.

EXAMPLE Network capacity, RAM, storage requirements, etc.

8.3.4Approval for release of the software update package

8.3.4.1A software update package shall be approved for release based on the performed verification andvalidation determined by 8.3.3.1.

EXAMPLE 1 Confirming the correct version is in the software update package.

EXAMPLE 2 Confirming validation and verification have been successfully completed.

# 8.4Workproducts

8.4.1 Documentation of targets, contents, compatibility, dependencies, necessary conditions, andnecessary in-vehicle resources in the target for the software update package resulting from 8.3.1.1 to 8.3.1.5.8.4.2 Software update package with only intended and necessary contents and actions resulting from

9.1objectives

The objectives of this clause are to ensure that the following activities are performed:

# 9.2 General

This clause includes requirements on identifying the targets of a software update campaign, obtaining vehicleconfiguration information, resolving targets into recipients, issuing the software update package and relevant

# 9.3Requirements andrecommendations

NOTE The list of target(s) is determined in 9.3.1.11 and is not in the purpose

EXAMPLE 1 A list of new features.

EXAMPLE 2Fixing a newly discovered vulnerability

702 9.3.1.2The organization shall assign roles and responsibilities for each software update campaign

EXAMPLE 1 A skilled person performs the software update operation in a workshop

9.3.1.5The organization shall determine which hardware versions and software versions in the targetsNOTE 2 It is possible to choose different software update methods for different software update packages inthe same software update campaign.

NOTE 1 It is possible to choose one or more software update methods.

9.3.1.8 The software update campaign plan shall specify the necessary conditions, in-vehicle resources

NOTE These resources can be determined from 8.3.3.4

EXAMPLE Necessary external resources could be available or remaining network capacity, workshop

9.3.1.9 The organization shall determine the implications of dependencies on other ECUs and software9.3.1.10The software update campaign plan shall specify appropriate procedures/measures forcorrective actions in the event of a software update operation failure in a vehicle.

729 NoTE 2 If several targets or recipients of the software update campaign have failures, the organization can732EXAMPLE 2 A corrective action can be to notify the vehicle user to stop the vehicle in a safe area and contact740NOTE Confirmation can be obtained for each single instance of software update campaign or a general741confirmation can be obtained at the beginning of the relationship between the vehicle user and the

9.3.1.14 The necessary information to be communicated concerning the software update campaign, the

745 NOTE 1 The related parties can include external (vehicle users, government) and/or internal (customer

9.3.1.15 For each software update campaign, a software update campaign plan shall be created, which

obtained for each software update campaign.

NOTE 2 Vehicle configuration information can be obtained from an entity other than directly from the vehicle

EXAMPLE A supplier obtains vehicle configuration information from an OEM.

EXAMPLE A vehicle model and year is resolved into specific VINs of individual vehicles.

9.3.2.3 Before starting the software update operation, the processes which are required in clause8(software update package development) and clause 9.3.1(software update campaign preparation) shall becompleted.

9.3.2.5 The software update campaign should ensure the necessary conditions, in-vehicle resources

9.3.2.6

in a recipient of the software update operation.

9.3.2.8The dependencies of the software update package(s) with existing hardware and software of therecipient shall be confirmed before activation.

EXAMPLE Confirming the dependencies with a tool.

9.3.2.9  The vehicle user should be informed about the availability of software update campaigns affectingtheir vehicles.

NOTE This confirmation can be performed by the vehicle or the infrastructure.

EXAMPLE 1 Sending the vehicle user written notification.

EXAMPLE 2 Displaying notification on an in-vehicle display

informed about related information including:

instructions for safely performing the software update operation;

- changes in vehicle functions due to the software update campaign;

- vehicle functions not available during the software updates operation and its implications for the vehicle- estimated time the vehicle or specific vehicle function(s) will not be available during the software updateoperation.

EXAMPLE 1 ECU functions can be made unavailable by: transiting into boot mode, resetting or rebooting anEXAMPLE 2 Information that the advanced emergency braking system is not functional during the softwareupdate operation.

794EXAMPLE 3 Information that the vehicle is not safe to drive.

in the software update operation.

confirmation may be obtained at the beginning of the relationship between the vehicle user and theNOTE 2 The vehicle user can have the capability to reject or postpone the software update campaign and canbe informed of the corresponding risk.

EXAMPLE A vehicle user confirmation could be obtained via:

- an in-vehicle display;

807 9.3.2.12  If the vehicle user is required to perform an action during software update campaign execution,

EXAMPLE If the vehicle needs to be turned off and on to complete the software update operation, then a9.3.2.13Software update campaign activities that require special equipment or training shall beperformed by a skilled person.

EXAMPLE 1 A skilled person servicing the vehicle at its location or in a workshop.

9.3.2.14 A corrective action shall be performed in accordance with the software update campaign plan

EXAMPLE 2 The status of each recipient can be used to calculate the progress of the software updatecampaign and it can be the“number of recipients which completed the software update operation" dividedby "number of recipients".

NOTE 2 The result of each vehicle can be "success, failure, interruption or cancellation, etc."

communicated to the related parties, including any changes to the user manual.

NOTE Information is identified in 9.3.1.14.

EXAMPLE 1 A software update campaign adds a completely new function and it requires new vehicle

EXAMPLE 2 The manual might be updated electronically inside the vehicle, changes sent out via email, made

# 9.3.3Software update campaign completion

9.3.3.1The records of the application of software update campaign shall be managed and stored

2The end of the software update campaign should be communicated to the vehicle user and related841NOTE It is not necessary to predetermine the end of a software update campaign during preparation or

# 9.4Workproducts

846 9.4.3Documentation related to the completion of the software update campaign resulting from 9.3.3.1 to

# Bibliography

[2]ISO/IEC 27001,Information technology—Security techniques—Information security management systems-Requirements

[1]IATF16949,a technical specification for automotivesectorquality management systems

[3]ISO/IEC 27002,Information technology—Security techniques—Codeof practice forinformation securitycontrols

[4]IS0/PAS 21448,Roadvehicles—Safetyoftheintended functionality

[5] IS0 13489,Safety of machinery —Safety-related parts of control systems

[6] IEC 61508,Functional safety of electrical/electronic/programmable electronic safety-related systems

[7] ISO 10007,Quality management—Guidelines for configuration management

[8] IS0 9001, Quality management systems —Requirements

